Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we are going
to be talking about the minimum wage.
In many countries around the world, there
are laws stating the minimum amount of
money that an employee should earn for
doing a job, the so-called “minimum wage”.
To some, this is a worthy
achievement, a law that protects
workers from exploitation at the
hands of greedy corporations.
To others, it is a red herring,
a feel-good measure that hurts
the very people it aims to help.
So, in this episode, we’ll explore the
history of the minimum wage, we’ll look
at some of the arguments for and against,
we’ll look at some examples of countries
where it has worked,  others where it
hasn’t, we’ll talk about the particular
case of the UK, and we’ll also learn about
how sometimes not having a minimum wage,
surprisingly enough, actually results in
higher wages for the lowest paid workers.
OK then, let’s get right into it,
and talk about The Minimum Wage.
I imagine that many of you can
remember your first real paycheck.
In the autumn, after I finished school,
I worked in a pub in a nearby village,
pulling pints, serving drinks and
making small talk with the regulars.
The shifts were quite long at times.
12 pm to 12 am was the longest
one, if I’m not mistaken.
Afterwards, I would go home on
my bike, exhausted after 12 hours
on my feet, serving drinkers who
would sometimes get increasingly
troublesome as the night went on.
For my work, I was paid £4.25 every
hour - the minimum wage in the UK at
the time, or at least, the minimum
wage for everyone under the age of 22.
And for reference, this was
in 2005, so it was about €6.
It seemed like a lot to me.
But I was living at home with
my parents, I didn’t pay rent,
and I didn’t pay for groceries.
It seemed like a lot to a fresh-faced
18-year-old, but clearly, it
wasn’t, at least not in the UK.
It was the minimum that any
company was legally allowed to
pay an employee; I literally
couldn’t have been paid any less.
But of course, this idea, that the
government should step in and set a
legal minimum for how little someone can
be paid, is a relatively new concept.
For most of history, wages
were determined by the market,
or more accurately, by power.
Whether you worked in the fields or
later on in a factory, the amount you
were paid was the result of a direct
agreement between you and your employer.
If you were desperate for work,
and your employer knew it, they
could pay you next to nothing.
And they often did.
Pick up any Charles Dickens novel and
you’ll find depictions of evil employers
squeezing their workers for every last
penny, paying them the absolute minimum
possible for them to not die of starvation
or from freezing to death at home.
And of course, the UK was not
alone in this, in its basically
“zero state intervention” policy
in terms of the amount an employer
needed to pay its employees.
All over the world, workers
typically had few protections, few
safeguards ensuring that they were
paid enough to live a decent life.
And although it is now popular to talk
about how we must crush the rich and
how evil billionaires are exploiting
the poor, the reality is that living
standards and disposable income for
the poorest in society, in practically
every country in the world, have
never been higher than they are today.
This is thanks to economic growth,
but there is an argument to be
made that it is also thanks to
the concept of the minimum wage.
In other words, the lowest salaries in
society are higher than ever before,
thanks to government intervention,
laws protecting workers from low pay.
Governments first started to get involved
at the end of the 19th century, and in
fact, the first countries to legislate
minimum wage laws were in a part of
the world you might not necessarily
expect: not post-revolutionary France
or English factory workers weary of
working 12 hours a day, 7 days a week.
It was, in fact, on the other side of
the world, in Australia and New Zealand.
In both countries, there was growing
concern that certain workers in certain
industries, especially women working
in clothes factories, were being paid
so little that they couldn’t afford
even the basic necessities of life.
A small number of employers held all
the power, and governments feared that
unless something changed, there would
be civil unrest, and they would have
a French Revolution-type situation
on their hands, with angry workers
rising up against their rulers.
The first laws came into place
in 1894 in New Zealand, and
in Australia two years later.
Initially, they were focused on individual
industries, but they quickly spread.
The idea was codified by a 1907
law called The Harvester Case,
which stated that there should be a
'living wage' for, and I’m quoting
directly, a man, his wife, and three
children to "live in frugal comfort".
Frugal, by the way, means careful with
money, so frugal comfort means living
comfortably but without any luxuries.
In other words, every job should
pay enough to support a decent
life for a family of five: a man,
his wife, and three children.
Now, perhaps you can complain about this
seeming like an archaic view of the world,
of a man going out to earn a living while
his wife and three children stay at home.
This was more than 100 years ago, so
clearly, certain things were different.
But what you might also quite rightly
point out is that this “living
wage” must surely have been more
generous than a modern “living wage”,
given that it aims to support one
non-working parent and three children.
In 21st-century Britain, at least, you
would certainly struggle to support
a family of five on the minimum wage.
But back to the start of the 20th century.
Understandably, the introduction of
the minimum wage proved popular with
workers, and the idea quickly spread.
In 1909, the United Kingdom passed
something called the Trade Boards
Act, which established wage boards
to set minimum wages in industries
that were considered especially
exploitative, things like garment work,
where mainly women and children were
exploited, forced to work long hours in
terrible conditions for very low pay.
In the United States, a national
minimum wage came a little
later, but not without a fight.
It was introduced in 1938, during the
Great Depression, as part of President
Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal.
At the time, it was set at $0.25 an hour,
around $5.70 in inflation-adjusted terms.
Even though the idea had spread
through much of Europe, it was
still a radical idea in America.
It was the biggest economy in the
world, the roaring heart of capitalism,
and the idea that the government
should intervene and say “this is
the minimum a company can pay its
employees”, well, that was controversial.
It would cost jobs, employers cried,
it would result in people being paid
less because companies would sack them.
Companies would go out of business if
they had to pay these higher wages.
To this, President Franklin D. Roosevelt
had a plain answer: tough luck.
Or, as he put it, “ it seems to me to
be equally plain that no business, which
depends for existence on paying less
than living wages to its workers, has
any right to continue in this country."
In other words, if you can’t pay
a fair wage to your employees,
you deserve to go out of business.
Now, the minimum wage in the US today
has not moved on much; the federal
minimum wage is dismally low, at
$7.25 an hour, but various states have
different laws about what companies
are required to pay their employees.
Almost 100 years later, in the spiritual
home of free-market capitalism, the
debate about the minimum wage rages on.
As it does, in fact, in every country
that has legislated on the minimum
wage, or where there are talks
about changing or increasing it.
Its supporters argue that it needs
to be protected at all costs, created
if it doesn’t exist already, or
increased if it is considered too low.
Without a fair minimum wage, the most
vulnerable in society risk being even
more exploited by powerful corporations.
People would be at the mercy of employers
who could pay as little as they liked,
especially in industries where workers
have very little bargaining power.
A minimum wage ensures that
there is at least a basic level
of fairness, that no one working
full-time should live in poverty.
On the other hand, critics argue that
setting a minimum wage could actually harm
the very people it is designed to help.
If you set the minimum wage too
high, they argue, employers might
respond by hiring fewer people,
cutting hours, replacing workers with
machines, or, of course, with AI.
They say that it can lead to higher
unemployment, especially among young
people, those with lower levels
of education, or those entering
the job market for the first time.
In other words, some people might
be better off, those who keep their
jobs and their same hours, but others
will lose their jobs completely and
be in a much worse economic position.
And the arguments for and against the
minimum wage go beyond ideas about
how much money a worker will be paid.
On the “pro minimum wage” side,
supporters argue that it can also
boost morale and productivity.
When workers feel they are being
treated fairly and paid a decent wage,
they are more likely to take pride in
their work, stay with their employer
for longer, and to contribute more.
This is good for them, good for their
mental health, and it’s also good
for the business, because it reduces
turnover and increases productivity.
Another argument in favour of
the minimum wage is that it
increases consumer spending.
If low-wage workers have more money
in their pockets, they are likely to
spend it in their local communities,
which helps stimulate the economy.
The wealthier an individual is, the
higher proportion of their income they
save, so if a company pays low earners
more, they will typically spend a greater
percentage of what they make than what
the wealthy company owners would spend.
So, it’s a good thing for local
and general economic growth.
But there are also more arguments
on the “anti-minimum wage” side.
Firstly, the concern that it puts
pressure on small businesses.
A large multinational company might be
able to absorb the higher wage costs,
but for a small shop or restaurant
operating on wafer-thin profit
margins, it could mean the difference
between staying open or shutting down.
Some economists argue that a blanket
minimum wage is a blunt tool, like trying
to tend to a flowerbed with a lawnmower
instead of precise little scissors.
A blanket minimum wage treats every
region and every industry the same,
even though the cost of living
and average wages vary hugely.
In the UK, for example, the entire
country is treated in the same
way, it is a national minimum wage.
As of April this year, it’s
£12.21 an hour whether you live in
central London or a remote village
in the north of the country.
And to state the obvious, like
in almost every country, the
cost of living varies a lot.
What you can buy with £12.21 in
London is very different from what
you can buy with £12.21 in rural
Wales or even a lower-cost-of-living
city like Belfast or Newcastle.
Yet the pay for a minimum
wage worker is the same.
This isn’t fair for workers, the argument
goes, someone in London needs to be
paid more, and someone in Newcastle
doesn’t need to be paid as much.
It also isn’t fair for businesses.
A wage that is perfectly reasonable
in high-cost central London might
be completely unaffordable for a
small business in a rural town.
Now, I should add that some countries
do legislate on the minimum wage
at a more regional level, which
evens out some of these disparities.
In China, for example, the minimum wage
in Beijing is almost 70% higher than it
is in rural western China, which helps
account for the different cost of living.
There is also the argument that
the minimum wage, if set too low,
legitimises and encourages low pay.
In the UK, many minimum wage workers
are still forced to turn to the
state for financial assistance.
But because their employers have met
their legal obligations, they can
wash their hands of the situation,
saying “we’re paying what we need
to do”, rather than paying a fair
and honest wage to their workers.
And finally, there is also the
argument that it does not necessarily
target those who need help the most.
In some cases, the person earning
a minimum wage might be a student
living at home, like I was, or a
second earner in a well-off household.
In other words, not everyone
earning the minimum wage is living
in poverty, and not everyone in
poverty is earning the minimum wage.
So, what would happen if
there were no minimum wage?
In theory, to the critics of the minimum
wage at least, businesses and employees
would be free to set their own wages.
People in high-cost-of-living
areas would be paid more, and
people in lower-cost-of-living
areas would be paid less.
And this is not just theory.
There are actually plenty of examples of
countries without minimum wage laws, some
where employees are paid much more than
in countries which have minimum wages.
Sweden, for example, has no minimum
wage laws, yet it has one of the
highest median wages in Europe.
In fact, most Scandinavian countries,
which tend to be at the top of
every table with average wages
and living standards, they don’t
have national minimum wage laws.
Now, this isn’t due to the great
benevolence and kindness of
Scandinavian employers, but rather
that most jobs are covered by trade
union agreements, so the union will
negotiate wages on behalf of employees.
These employees are highly protected
in terms of what a company can pay
them, the protection just comes
from the trade union, not the state.
The logic behind this is that wages
are better determined by those who
understand the specific needs of an
industry, rather than by politicians, and,
given the relatively high wages of the
lowest-paid workers in Scandinavia, it’s
hard to deny that it works pretty well.
Now, the last thing I want to talk
about today is the situation in the
UK, because something interesting has
been happening with the minimum wage.
Ever since the national minimum
wage was introduced by Tony Blair
in 1999, it has continued to rise.
It started at £3.60 an hour, and
in April this year it was increased
from £11.44 to £12.21 an hour.
Compounded, this is an average
growth of almost 5% a year, which is
significantly higher than the growth
in non-minimum wage jobs, which
increased at a rate of 2.8% a year.
So the minimum wage increased almost
twice as much as the average salary,
which has led to this slightly unusual
situation in which the difference
between minimum wage jobs and more
skilled jobs has been massively reduced.
For example, the salary for a
graduate nuclear engineer in
the UK starts at around £22,000
year, which is around €25,000.
The minimum wage of £12.21 an hour,
for someone working full-time, would
result in a salary of £23,873 a year,
more than a graduate nuclear engineer.
Now, clearly, the nuclear engineer most
likely has better career prospects;
they can get promoted, paid more, and
perhaps the work is more fulfilling
than in many minimum-wage jobs.
Perhaps you might even argue that this
is the way it should be, that someone
doing public service cleaning the streets
in the rain should be paid just as
much, more, even, than someone sitting
behind a desk and answering emails.
But there have been plenty of stories in
the British press over the past few years
of young people complaining about this
situation, asking themselves why they
should slave away at university for 3 or
4 years, getting into tens of thousands
of pounds of debt only to get a job
where they are paid the same as someone
working in an unskilled, minimum wage job.
“What’s the point of studying and working
hard,” they ask, “if it isn’t going to
result in any better financial situation?”
To wrap things up, the minimum
wage is one of those fascinating
topics that divides people on both
sides of the political spectrum.
On the right, there are those who oppose
it because they see it as excessive
government intervention in the free
market, something that distorts natural
supply and demand and risks killing jobs.
But there are also those on the right
who support it as a way of reducing
the need for government welfare,
arguing that if people are paid
more, they rely less on the state.
On the left, there are those who support
it because it protects vulnerable
workers, reduces inequality, and ensures
a basic level of dignity in work.
But they have colleagues on the left
who criticise it as a distraction,
arguing that it doesn't go far enough,
and that we should be talking instead
about living wages, stronger unions,
or even universal basic income.
Indeed, when I was researching this
episode and I wanted to double-check
the date that Tony Blair’s government
implemented the minimum wage, I
googled “Tony Blair minimum wage”.
The first two results I got were
both from left-leaning publications:
Jacobin and The Guardian.
The first result read “Britain’s Minimum
Wage Law Has Been an Abject Failure”.
And the second read, “Minimum
wage is UK’s ‘most successful
economic policy in a generation’”.
It just goes to show that when it comes
to the minimum wage, two people who
might otherwise agree on most things can
look at exactly the same policy and come
to drastically different conclusions.
OK then, that is it for today's
episode on the minimum wage.
I hope it's been an interesting one
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
Is there a minimum wage in your country?
How has it changed over time,
and what do you think about its
advantages and disadvantages?
For the members among you, you can head
right into our community forum, which is
at community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.